---
layout: exam_info
num: e02
ready: true
desc: "Midterm exam - II "
exam_date: 2019-05-23 17:00:00.00-7
---


## Logistics
	- Bring studentID and writing utensils
		- Preferable dark led
		- PLEASE WRITE LEGIBLY
	- No electronic devices, No book
	- 1 double-sided 8"x11" sheet of handwritten notes 
		- please don't staple them or write on two sheets
		- write your name and PERM# on the top right corner on both sides

## Format
	- Similar to midterm 1 (more or less)
	- Possible types of questions
		- Short answers
		- Explain, describe, define, ...
		- Write some code
		- Fill in the blank
		- True / False (if false, explain)
		- Given code, write the output
	- Covers a broad range of topics, but probably not everything.

## Topics

Check the book and lecture notes for example problems.

```
  File IO
    - reading and writing from / to files

  C++ build process
    - Breaking code into multiple files (.cpp , .h)
    - Preprocessing vs. Compilation vs. Linking
    - Makefiles
      - General syntax
      - Conceptual understanding
      - Simple g++ compilation rules

  TestDriven Development
    - Write a test that does ...
    - Given tests, which ones pass
    - Explain Test Driven Development ...

  Arrays
    - Declaration
    - Syntax
    - Reading / writing elements

  Number Conversion
    - Any base to base 10 notation
    - Binary to base 10 / Base 10 to binary
    - Hex to binary / binary to Hex

  Memory concepts and pointers
    - Pointer syntax
    - Arrays as pointers
    - Dereferencing / address of
    - pass by reference vs. pass by value
    - reference variables

  Structs
    - Defining / declaring structures
    - pointers to structs
      - "->" operator vs. dereferencing

  Pointer Arithmetic
    - compute the offset of arrays
    - Segmentation faults
    - passing a pointer by value / reference

  Dynamic memory management
    - stack vs. heap
    - dynamic allocation / deallocation
      - "new" operator
      - "delete" operator
    - Dangling pointers
    - Memory leaks
    
  Linked lists
    - write a linked list structure for ...
```


### Midterm 2 Practice Questions

* Makefiles
	* What is the purpose?
	* What goes into compiling?
	* Compiling vs linking
	* Three main parts of commands (target, dependencies, command)
	* What is the syntax of a makefile?

* File IO
	* Cin, cout, what are they good for?
	* ifstream and ofstream
	* How to create a new file?
	* How to open a file? How to close?
	* How to read from file?
	* How to use `getline()`? Difference from `get()`?
	* How to iterate through entire file

* Arrays
	* What are they? Why use them?
	* Can you mix different types?
	* Index of first element -- 0 or 1?
	* How do you deal with an array's size? Ex. in a function call
	* How do you create an array? 
	* How to loop through an array?
		* How do you add to an arrary? 
		* How to read from an array? 
	* Bounds of an array
	* How do you pass in / work with arrays in functions?

* Header files
	* What are they? Why do we use them?
	* .h files vs .cpp files
	* What goes into a .h file? What doesn’t?
	* How do you use #include statements to import other files?

* Testing/Debugging
	* Stubs -- what are they?
	* What are preconditions / postconditions?
	* Debugging Strategies

* Counting in new Bases
	* What is base 2?
	* How to convert base 10 to base 2? And the other way around?
	* What is octal? What is hexadecimal?
	* What is “positional notation”?
	* How do you “group the bits” to make converting easier?
	* Why is this all useful? Why not just use base ten?

* Pass by value vs reference
	* What is the difference? When should we use one over the other?
	* Swap value using pass by reference vs value
	* What are references?
	* What is the `&` character?
	* How do you pass by reference to a function?
	* Can references change the variables they are assigned to?
	* Can we use pointers instead of references? What is the difference?

* Pointers
	* What are they? Why useful? What do they hold?
	* How do we create a pointer?
	* How do we point a pointer to a different variable?
	* What is the `*` operator? What does it do? Why do we use it?
	* How are pointers and arrays linked?
	* What is pointer arithmetic?

* Structures
	* What are they? Why do we use them?
	* What are some examples?
	* How do we access member variables?
	* Structs inside structs
	* How to access member vars of structs inside structs

* Linked lists
	* what does the structure look like
	* inserting a new node to the empty list
	* inserting a new node to the beginning/end of the list
	* iterating through a list

Good Luck!

